---
title: Ionic and Fastlane
date: 2017-08-15 16:00:00 +0000
published: true
last_updated: ''
---
# Ionic and Fastlane

## Fastlane?
[`fastlane`](https://fastlane.tools/) describes itself as 
> [...] the tool to release your iOS and Android app 🚀
It handles all tedious tasks, like generating screenshots, dealing with code signing, and releasing your application. 

or 

> The easiest way to automate building and releasing your iOS and Android apps 

Most people probably come into contact with Fastlane because it also promises to get rid of the certification and signing chaos often created when developing for iOS. I know that alone was enough to sell me on the tool.

But Fastlane also offers much more: creating screenshots, managing and uploading metadata to the stores, creating apps entries, even building and (beta) distribution. With all the tools in its toolchain, the whole "deploy + release" process can be covered:

- `produce` = Create apps on Apple Developer Center and iTunes Connect
- `precheck` = Check if your app and its data will pass the app review
- `deliver` = Upload metadata for iOS apps
- `supply` = Upload metadata for Android apps
- `match` = Manage iOS certificates and provisioning profiles
- `snapshot` = Screenshots for iOS apps
- `screengrab` = Screengrabs for Android apps
- `gym` = Build your iOS apps

You can also manually manage your certificates with `pem`, `sigh` and `cert`, handle your testing with `scan`, `pilot` and `boarding`, use `frameit` to put your iOS screenshots into a template or manually to Apple Dev center and iTunes Connect with `spaceship`.

## Fastlane + Ionic or Cordova?

So how about Ionic support with its hybrid apps based on Cordova? Well, it won't work out of the box:

Fastlane expects projects to be iOS _or_ Android and wants to be installed into the native projects. And as these are generated with Ionic/Cordova projects (`/platforms/ios` and `/platforms/android`), handled as build artifacts and not checked into `git`, the `fastlane` installation and configuration would get lost with each new checkout of the project. 

The commands you execute via the `ionic` CLI are also unique for Ionic (`ionic cordova build`, `ionic cordova prepare` etc.) [same if you are using the `cordova` CLI directly for `cordova build`, `cordova prepare` etc], and so are of course not taken into consideration in all documentation of Fastlane and the published tutorials around the web.

In sum this requires some creative handling of things and also usage of some plugins. But: It is perfectly doable!

> Note: Unfortunately `fastlane` can only be installed and used on Mac OS and Linux system as some of its internal dependencies depend on functionality, that is not available for Windows (yet). Bummer.

Just follow these steps to use all the relevant `fastlane` tools with your Ionic app:


## Fastlane for Ionic/Cordova step by step

1. [Initialize Fastlane and create remote apps](initialize-fastlane-for-your-cordova-ios-and-android-apps.md)
   * [Optinal: Put `/platforms` under version control](put-platforms-under-version-control.md)
1. [Create local metadata file structure with `deliver` and `supply`](create-local-file-structure.md)
1. [Setup iOS certificate handling with `match`](setup-ios-certificate-handling.md)
1. [Build and upload your app for testing](build-and-upload-for-testing.md)
   * [Handle version numbers automatically with Fastlane](handle-version-numbers-automatically-with-fastlane.md)
1. [Add first metadata and upload them to stores](add-metadata-and-publish.md)
1. [Take screenshots of your Ionic app (iOS and Android) with Fastlane](take-screenshots-of-your-ionic-app-ios-ad-android-with-fastlane.md)
   * [iOS Screenshots with `snapshot`](ios-screenshots-with-snapshot.md)
     * [UI Tests for your Cordova iOS app ](uitest-for-cordova-apps.md)
   * [Android Screenshots with `screengrab`](android-screenshots-with-screengrab.md)
     * [Instrumented (Espresso or UI Automator) tests for your Cordova Android app](instrumented-espresso-or-ui-automator-tests-for-android-cordova-app.md)
   * [Upload your generated screenshots to stores](TODO)
1. Run all your tests TODO
1. [Build and upload your app for release](build-and-upload-for-release.md)

## Example project on GitHub

You can also cheat a bit and just look at this example project on GitHub. It includes all the things generated by following the above steps:

[https://github.com/ionic-zone/ionic-fastlane](https://github.com/ionic-zone/ionic-fastlane)

The README also explains what to do to get it working locally, and links to the (automatically generated) `fastlane` README that lists all the functionality available.


